README.md, before:

# Latticeville

A local-only simulation for studying multi-agent systems with memory. Implements a memory-first agent loop inspired by the [Generative Agents paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442), focusing on how agents perceive, remember, retrieve, and act in a small world.

**Status:** Early development — core simulation loop in progress.

## What It Does

Latticeville simulates LLM-driven characters in a tiny world with a focus on memory systems. Each agent follows a loop: perceive → remember → retrieve → act. The simulation runs entirely locally using terminal-based ASCII rendering.

## Documentation

- [Technical Specification](thinking/spec.md) — Detailed technical design and implementation details
- [Architecture](thinking/architecture.md) — System architecture and design decisions

## Quickstart

```bash
# Install dependencies
uv sync

# Run the simulation
uv run python -m latticeville
```

## Development

```bash
uv run pytest      # Run tests
uv run ruff check .  # Lint
uv run ruff format . # Format
```

## License

Open source — see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

Commit message:

Document tool-called action selection and world dynamics model
- Update spec to use single 'act' tool call with enum kind (MOVE/INTERACT/SAY/NOOP)
- Add deterministic execution, validation, and templated memory narration
- Document world dynamics step (weather now, maintenance/services future)
- Update architecture to reflect LLM as decision policy approach
- Clarify research.md baseline context

README.md, after:

# Latticeville

A local-only simulation for studying multi-agent systems with memory. Implements a memory-first agent loop inspired by the [Generative Agents paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442), focusing on how agents perceive, remember, retrieve, and act in a small world.

**Status:** Early development — core simulation loop in progress.

## What It Does

Latticeville simulates LLM-driven characters in a tiny world with a focus on memory systems. Each agent follows a loop: perceive → remember → retrieve → act. The simulation runs entirely locally using terminal-based ASCII rendering.

In the baseline design, the LLM acts as a **decision policy**: each tick it selects exactly one structured action (e.g., MOVE/INTERACT/SAY/NOOP) via tool/function calling, and the simulator applies deterministic state transitions and logs events for replay.

The simulator also supports a separate **world dynamics** step (e.g., weather/time now; later, village maintenance/services) that updates canonical state and emits events agents can perceive.

## Documentation

- [Technical Specification](thinking/spec.md) — Detailed technical design and implementation details
- [Architecture](thinking/architecture.md) — System architecture and design decisions

## Quickstart

```bash
# Install dependencies
uv sync

# Run the simulation
uv run python -m latticeville
```

## Development

```bash
uv run pytest      # Run tests
uv run ruff check .  # Lint
uv run ruff format . # Format
```

## License

Open source — see [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.
