thinking/spec.md, before:

# 🏘️ Latticeville — Project + Technical Spec

# Summary

Latticeville is a local-only, terminal-UI simulation of a tiny cyberpunk neon village with LLM-driven characters. The main goal is to implement the core _memory-first_ loop from the Generative Agents paper using a fully local LLM system. 🧱🤖

**Note:** This spec reflects the intended final outcome of the project and does not encode the strategy or order in which it will be implemented.

# Project Goals

- Implement a small, clear agent loop: perceive → remember → retrieve → act.
- Support reflections: periodic synthesis of insights from accumulated memories.
- Prioritize memory systems and long-horizon behavior over visuals.
- Keep the UI terminal-only (ASCII) and simple to run locally.
- Maintain separation between simulation (model) and rendering (view).
- Support many agents (target ~10) with a minimal memory loop.
- Use a discrete tick-based scheduler.
- Provide a terminal debug viewer that prints state.
- Include replay support: record tick-based changes and events to a local log.

# Non-Goals

- No web UI or replay website.
- No networked dependencies or telemetry.
- No complex world building or very large maps.

# Technical Spec

## Architecture

- `latticeville/sim/` contains world state, agents, and tick logic.
- `latticeville/render/` contains terminal rendering only.
- The renderer accepts state and returns output; no mutation.
- `latticeville/db/` optionally holds persistence for memories and replay logs.
- `latticeville/llm/` holds local LLM adapters and prompt helpers.

## World Model (tree)

- World is a tree of areas and objects (root = world, areas can contain subareas or objects, objects are leaves).
- Example: World → House (area) → Kitchen (subarea) → Stove (object).
- Each node has: `id`, `name`, `type` (`area`, `object`, `agent`), `parent_id`,
  and ordered `children`.
- Agents live in the tree as nodes with a current location (parent).
- Each agent maintains a **personal subtree / belief view** for locations and objects it knows.
- Agent belief views may diverge temporarily from the canonical world state (stale/partial),
  but follow the same structural schema (tree of nodes + containment).
- Perception uses the current area node and its immediate children.
- State transitions are deterministic given actions (non-determinism comes from LLM action generation).

## Core Agent Loop (per tick)

1. **Perceive** local environment (nearby objects + agents within visual range).
2. **Record observations** into memory stream:
   - Agent's own actions (what the agent did)
   - Other agents' actions (behaviors observed from nearby agents)
   - Object state changes (e.g., "refrigerator is empty", "stove is burning")
   - Inter-agent interactions (conversations, encounters)
3. **Retrieve** relevant memories using a scored subset (includes observations, plans, and reflections).
4. **Plan** (if needed):
   - If no plan exists, create a daily plan in broad strokes (5–8 chunks).
   - Recursively decompose plans: day plan → hour chunks → 5–15 minute actions as needed.
   - Plans include time and location, stored in memory stream.
5. **Decide** whether to react to new observations or follow current plan.
   - If reacting, update the plan from that point forward.
6. **Act** (structured action selection).
   - The LLM selects **exactly one** action via tool/function calling (no free-text parsing).
   - Action is chosen from the current plan (or generated as a reaction) but returned in a
     machine-executable form.
   - Invalid actions are handled by server-side validation and fall back to `NOOP`/`WAIT`.
7. **Execute** the action deterministically in the simulator.
   - Simulator applies canonical state updates and emits structured events (see below).
8. **Write back** action (as natural language) and any reflections/plans into memory.
   - Memory narration is generated from templates based on the executed action/event, to keep
     memory consistent with canonical state and replay.

### Action selection via tool calling (baseline)

The baseline uses a single required tool call, `act`, to enforce "one decision per tick".

- **Tool name**: `act`
- **Guarantee**: model must call the tool once per tick (we include `NOOP`/`WAIT` as a valid choice)
- **Output shape**: one of a small set of `kind` values, with arguments.

Conceptual schema:

```json
{
  "kind": "NOOP" | "WAIT" | "MOVE" | "INTERACT" | "SAY",
  "move": { "to_location_id": "..." },
  "interact": { "object_id": "...", "verb": "USE" | "OPEN" | "CLOSE" | "TAKE" | "DROP" },
  "say": { "to_agent_id": "...", "utterance": "..." }
}
```

The simulator provides a per-tick list of valid targets (visible/reachable locations, visible objects,
visible agents). The executor validates arguments against these sets and uses `NOOP` on invalid input.

### Tick-Based State Consistency

- Agents perceive state only as it existed at the end of the previous tick.
- All agent updates within a tick see the same world state snapshot (from the end of the previous tick).
- All state updates are applied at the end of the tick. The order in which agents are processed within a tick does not affect what state other agents observe.

### Object State Changes

 - When an agent acts on an object, the chosen action includes the target object and an interaction verb.
 - The simulator applies a deterministic transition (object-specific rule/state machine) to update
   canonical state.
 - The simulator emits an `OBJECT_STATE_CHANGED(...)` event describing the transition.
 - Other agents perceive updated object states in the next tick (step 1 of the loop).
 - The acting agent is aware of its own action immediately (and writes it to memory), even though
   environment perception remains tick-boundary consistent.

## Memory Stream

Each memory record is an append-only entry with:

- `description` (text)
- `created_at` (tick)
- `last_accessed_at` (tick)
- `importance` (1–10)
- `type` (`observation`, `plan`, `reflection`, `action`)
- Optional `location_id` (when the memory is grounded in a place)
- `links` to supporting records (for reflections)

### What gets recorded as observations

Observations are direct perceptions recorded each tick. Agents perceive their local environment based on visual range: they observe all agents and objects within their current area (and immediate subareas).

- **Agent's own actions**: "Isabella Rodriguez is setting out the pastries"
  - Recorded in third person after the agent performs an action (from step 5 of the loop).
- **Other agents' actions**: "Maria Lopez is studying for a Chemistry test while drinking coffee"
  - Only agents within visual range (same area) are observed. Each agent sees what other agents in their area are doing.
- **Object states**: "The refrigerator is empty", "The stove is burning"
  - Objects in the agent's current area and immediate subareas are perceived.
- **Inter-agent interactions**: "Isabella Rodriguez and Maria Lopez are conversing about planning a Valentine's day party"
  - When agents engage in dialogue, both participants (and any observers in the same area) record the conversation as an observation.
  - Dialogue initiation is perceived: "John is initiating a conversation with Eddy"
  - Full conversation exchanges are recorded as they occur, allowing agents to remember what was said.

Agents only perceive what exists in their current location—they cannot observe agents or objects in other areas unless they move there.

### Location notes / annotations

- Agents can attach lightweight _annotations_ to locations (e.g., "The cafe is usually crowded").
- These exist only in the agent's own belief tree (not in the canonical world state), as they represent subjective observations about locations.
- These can be modeled as memories with `type=annotation` (or a dedicated table/stream),
  typically with a `location_id`.

### Retrieval Scoring

Score = recency + relevance + importance, normalized to [0, 1].

- **Recency** decays exponentially since last access.
- **Relevance** can start as simple keyword overlap, or a simple BM25 implementation.
- **Importance** assigned at creation time by asking the LLM.

Select top-k memories that fit the context window.

## Reflection

- Check at the end of each agent tick: if the sum of importance scores for recent memories (since the last reflection) exceeds a threshold, trigger reflection.
- Generate 3-5 insights and store as reflections.
- Link reflections to supporting memories.

## Planning

- Agents create a daily plan in broad strokes (5–8 chunks), then recursively decompose it: day plan → hour chunks → 5–15 minute actions.
- Plans are stored in the memory stream with time and location, and are included in retrieval.
- When new observations occur, the agent decides whether to react; if so, it updates the plan from that point forward.

## LLM Usage (local only)

- Use [Qwen3](https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3) model via the [vLLM Metal](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm-metal), with my own shallow adapter.
- Prompts should be short and deterministic where possible.
- Avoid external APIs.
- Batch multiple requests wherever possible (see [vLLM docs](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/)). This requires experimentation but we are likely going to process multiple agents at the same time.

## Movement and Location Changes

- When an agent decides to move (step 5/6 of the agent loop), it specifies a destination location (area or object) in the `MOVE` action.
- Each location-to-location edge in the world tree has a fixed tick cost (`travel_ticks`). Total travel time is calculated by summing these costs along the path from current location to destination (graph-based distance, not geometric pathfinding). During travel, the agent is **in transit** and cannot interact or converse (prevents “talking before arrival”).
- While in transit, the agent is considered present in intermediate travel locations for perception/visibility.
  - Practically: compute a traversal path in the world tree and advance one edge per tick (`travel_ticks = 1`
    per edge) so agents can perceive each other “on the way” and potentially re-plan.
- When the traversal completes, update `current_location` at the end of that tick and emit
  `MOVE(agent_id, from_location, to_location)`.
- Note: this diverges from the paper, which computes walking paths in a rendered environment/game engine ([paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03442)); we use graph-based distance calculation with fixed tick costs per edge instead.

## World transition model (ambient events)

In addition to agent actions, the simulator may apply world-level transitions each tick (e.g., time-of-day,
weather, ambient object changes). These are deterministic given the run seed/config and are emitted as
events (e.g., `WEATHER_CHANGED`, `TIME_ADVANCED`). Agents perceive these changes in the next tick.

This is a separate “world dynamics” step that can grow over time:

- **Weather system**: e.g., `weather_state` transitions (`CLEAR` → `RAIN` → `CLEAR`), wind, temperature
  bands. Emits `WEATHER_CHANGED(old, new)`.
- **Village maintenance / services** (future): e.g., scheduled repairs, trash collection, power outages,
  shop opening/closing, restocking. Emits events like `MAINTENANCE_STARTED`, `MAINTENANCE_COMPLETED`,
  `SERVICE_OUTAGE`, `RESTOCKED`.
- **Scheduled world events** (future): festivals, alerts, NPC deliveries, ambient announcements.

The world model should remain simulator-owned (not agent-owned): it updates canonical state and emits events,
and agents can only react by perceiving the resulting state/event stream in subsequent ticks.

## Rendering (terminal)

- Multiple viewers can be attachable (e.g., one prints summary, one logs JSON, one draws ASCII).
- Viewers are tick-synchronized: they see whole-tick state (and optional events) only (no partial updates).
- Any future simulator inputs (pause/step/commands) must enter as explicit simulator inputs,
  applied only at tick boundaries.
- Replay/logging may store full per-tick state frames (simplest) or events with occasional state (more compact)
  (see [Architecture](thinking/architecture.md)).
- A simple state debugger can be rendered as a separate viewer.

# References

- Paper Summary: [/thinking/paper/summary.md](/thinking/paper/summary.md)
- Paper Abstract: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442
- Paper PDF: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03442

Commit message:

Clarify and standardize thinking docs
- Add index.md with doc reading order and terminology glossary
- Standardize on TickPayload naming (was TickFrame)
- Remove location annotations concept (use observations instead)
- Remove location_id from memory records
- Clarify MOVE targets locations only, INTERACT targets objects
- Specify BM25 for relevance scoring (remove embeddings mentions)
- Add tick time model and config file concept for constants
- Clarify travel costs: all edges cost 1 tick (configurable)
- Clarify conversation: one SAY per tick
- Clarify perception: current area + objects (leaf nodes) only
- Remove all emojis from project docs
- Standardize on vLLM (remove Ollama mentions)

thinking/spec.md, after:

# Latticeville — Project + Technical Spec

# Summary

Latticeville is a local-only, terminal-UI simulation of a tiny cyberpunk neon village with LLM-driven characters. The main goal is to implement the core _memory-first_ loop from the Generative Agents paper using a fully local LLM system.

**Note:** This spec reflects the intended final outcome of the project and does not encode the strategy or order in which it will be implemented.

# Project Goals

- Implement a small, clear agent loop: perceive → remember → retrieve → act.
- Support reflections: periodic synthesis of insights from accumulated memories.
- Prioritize memory systems and long-horizon behavior over visuals.
- Keep the UI terminal-only (ASCII) and simple to run locally.
- Maintain separation between simulation (model) and rendering (view).
- Support many agents (target ~10) with a minimal memory loop.
- Use a discrete tick-based scheduler.
- Provide a terminal debug viewer that prints state.
- Include replay support: record tick-based changes and events to a local log.

# Non-Goals

- No web UI or replay website.
- No networked dependencies or telemetry.
- No complex world building or very large maps.

# Technical Spec

## Architecture

- `latticeville/sim/` contains world state, agents, and tick logic.
- `latticeville/render/` contains terminal rendering only.
- The renderer accepts state and returns output; no mutation.
- `latticeville/db/` optionally holds persistence for memories and replay logs.
- `latticeville/llm/` holds local LLM adapters and prompt helpers.

## World Model (tree)

- World is a tree of areas and objects (root = world, areas can contain subareas or objects, objects are leaves).
- Example: World → House (area) → Kitchen (subarea) → Stove (object).
- Each node has: `id`, `name`, `type` (`area`, `object`, `agent`), `parent_id`,
  and ordered `children`.
- Agents live in the tree as nodes with a current location (parent).
- Each agent maintains a **personal subtree / belief view** for locations and objects it knows.
- Agent belief views may diverge temporarily from the canonical world state (stale/partial),
  but follow the same structural schema (tree of nodes + containment).
- Perception uses the current area node and the **object leaf nodes** contained in that area.
- State transitions are deterministic given actions (non-determinism comes from LLM action generation).

## Core Agent Loop (per tick)

1. **Perceive** local environment (nearby objects + agents within visual range).
2. **Record observations** into memory stream:
   - Agent's own actions (what the agent did)
   - Other agents' actions (behaviors observed from nearby agents)
   - Object state changes (e.g., "refrigerator is empty", "stove is burning")
   - Inter-agent interactions (conversations, encounters)
3. **Retrieve** relevant memories using a scored subset (includes observations, plans, and reflections).
4. **Plan** (if needed):
   - If no plan exists, create a daily plan in broad strokes (5–8 chunks).
   - Recursively decompose plans: day plan → hour chunks → 5–15 minute actions as needed.
   - Plans include time and location, stored in memory stream.
5. **Decide** whether to react to new observations or follow current plan.
   - If reacting, update the plan from that point forward.
6. **Act** (structured action selection).
   - The LLM selects **exactly one** action via tool/function calling (no free-text parsing).
   - Action is chosen from the current plan (or generated as a reaction) but returned in a
     machine-executable form.
   - Invalid actions are handled by server-side validation and fall back to `NOOP`/`WAIT`.
7. **Execute** the action deterministically in the simulator.
   - Simulator applies canonical state updates and emits structured events (see below).
8. **Write back** action (as natural language) and any reflections/plans into memory.
   - Memory narration is generated from templates based on the executed action/event, to keep
     memory consistent with canonical state and replay.

### Action selection via tool calling (baseline)

The baseline uses a single required tool call, `act`, to enforce "one decision per tick".

- **Tool name**: `act`
- **Guarantee**: model must call the tool once per tick (we include `NOOP`/`WAIT` as a valid choice)
- **Output shape**: one of a small set of `kind` values, with arguments.

Conceptual schema:

```json
{
  "kind": "NOOP" | "WAIT" | "MOVE" | "INTERACT" | "SAY",
  "move": { "to_location_id": "..." },
  "interact": { "object_id": "...", "verb": "USE" | "OPEN" | "CLOSE" | "TAKE" | "DROP" },
  "say": { "to_agent_id": "...", "utterance": "..." }
}
```

The simulator provides a per-tick list of valid targets:

- **Locations**: reachable *area/location* ids for `MOVE` (not objects).
- **Objects**: object ids in the agent’s current area for `INTERACT`.
- **Agents**: agent ids in the current area for `SAY`.

The executor validates arguments against these sets and uses `NOOP` on invalid input.

### Tick-Based State Consistency

- Agents perceive state only as it existed at the end of the previous tick.
- All agent updates within a tick see the same world state snapshot (from the end of the previous tick).
- All state updates are applied at the end of the tick. The order in which agents are processed within a tick does not affect what state other agents observe.

### Object State Changes

 - When an agent acts on an object, the chosen action includes the target object and an interaction verb.
 - The simulator applies a deterministic transition (object-specific rule/state machine) to update
   canonical state.
 - The simulator emits an `OBJECT_STATE_CHANGED(...)` event describing the transition.
 - Other agents perceive updated object states in the next tick (step 1 of the loop).
 - The acting agent is aware of its own action immediately (and writes it to memory), even though
   environment perception remains tick-boundary consistent.

## Memory Stream

Each memory record is an append-only entry with:

- `description` (text)
- `created_at` (tick)
- `last_accessed_at` (tick)
- `importance` (1–10)
- `type` (`observation`, `plan`, `reflection`, `action`)
- `links` to supporting records (for reflections)

### What gets recorded as observations

Observations are direct perceptions recorded each tick. Agents perceive their local environment based on visual range: they observe the other agents in their current area, and the objects (leaf nodes) in their current area.

- **Agent's own actions**: "Isabella Rodriguez is setting out the pastries"
  - Recorded in third person after the agent performs an action (from step 5 of the loop).
- **Other agents' actions**: "Maria Lopez is studying for a Chemistry test while drinking coffee"
  - Only agents within visual range (same area) are observed. Each agent sees what other agents in their area are doing.
- **Object states**: "The refrigerator is empty", "The stove is burning"
  - Objects in the agent's current area and immediate subareas are perceived.
- **Inter-agent interactions**: "Isabella Rodriguez and Maria Lopez are conversing about planning a Valentine's day party"
  - When agents engage in dialogue, both participants (and any observers in the same area) record the conversation as an observation.
  - Dialogue initiation is perceived: "John is initiating a conversation with Eddy"
  - Conversation proceeds at **one turn per tick** per speaking agent (i.e., one `SAY` action per tick).

Agents only perceive what exists in their current location—they cannot observe agents or objects in other areas unless they move there.

### Retrieval Scoring

Score = recency + relevance + importance, normalized to [0, 1].

- **Recency** decays exponentially since last access.
- **Relevance** uses BM25 over the memory `description` field (baseline).
- **Importance** assigned at creation time by asking the LLM.

Select top-k memories that fit the context window.

## Reflection

- Check at the end of each agent tick: if the sum of importance scores for recent memories (since the last reflection) exceeds a threshold, trigger reflection.
- Generate 3-5 insights and store as reflections.
- Link reflections to supporting memories.

## Planning

- Agents create a daily plan in broad strokes (5–8 chunks), then recursively decompose it: day plan → hour chunks → 5–15 minute actions.
- Plans are stored in the memory stream with time and location, and are included in retrieval.
- When new observations occur, the agent decides whether to react; if so, it updates the plan from that point forward.

## LLM Usage (local only)

- Use [Qwen3](https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3) model via the [vLLM Metal](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm-metal), with my own shallow adapter.
- Prompts should be short and deterministic where possible.
- Avoid external APIs.
- Batch multiple requests wherever possible (see [vLLM docs](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/)). This requires experimentation but we are likely going to process multiple agents at the same time.

## Movement and Location Changes

- When an agent decides to move (step 5/6 of the agent loop), it specifies a destination **location/area** id in the `MOVE` action.
- Travel time is computed as: number of edges along the path \(\times\) a constant per-edge cost.
  - Baseline: all edges have the same cost, and it is set to `1` tick per edge.
- During travel, the agent is **in transit** and cannot interact or converse (prevents “talking before arrival”).
- While in transit, the agent advances one edge per tick, occupying intermediate locations for perception/visibility so agents can perceive each other “on the way” and potentially re-plan.
- When the traversal completes, update `current_location` at the end of that tick and emit
  `MOVE(agent_id, from_location, to_location)`.
- Note: this diverges from the paper, which computes walking paths in a rendered environment/game engine ([paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03442)); we use graph-based distance calculation with fixed tick costs per edge instead.

## World transition model (ambient events)

In addition to agent actions, the simulator may apply world-level transitions each tick (e.g., time-of-day,
weather, ambient object changes). These are deterministic given the run seed/config and are emitted as
events (e.g., `WEATHER_CHANGED`, `TIME_ADVANCED`). Agents perceive these changes in the next tick.

This is a separate “world dynamics” step that can grow over time:

- **Weather system**: e.g., `weather_state` transitions (`CLEAR` → `RAIN` → `CLEAR`), wind, temperature
  bands. Emits `WEATHER_CHANGED(old, new)`.
- **Village maintenance / services** (future): e.g., scheduled repairs, trash collection, power outages,
  shop opening/closing, restocking. Emits events like `MAINTENANCE_STARTED`, `MAINTENANCE_COMPLETED`,
  `SERVICE_OUTAGE`, `RESTOCKED`.
- **Scheduled world events** (future): festivals, alerts, NPC deliveries, ambient announcements.

The world model should remain simulator-owned (not agent-owned): it updates canonical state and emits events,
and agents can only react by perceiving the resulting state/event stream in subsequent ticks.

## Rendering (terminal)

- Multiple viewers can be attachable (e.g., one prints summary, one logs JSON, one draws ASCII).
- Viewers are tick-synchronized: they see whole-tick state (and optional events) only (no partial updates).
- Any future simulator inputs (pause/step/commands) must enter as explicit simulator inputs,
  applied only at tick boundaries.
- Replay/logging may store full per-tick state frames (simplest) or events with occasional state (more compact)
  (see [Architecture](thinking/architecture.md)).
- A simple state debugger can be rendered as a separate viewer.

## Tick time model

- Each tick represents a fixed unit of simulated time.
- The tick duration is a configurable constant (see `thinking/architecture.md` for configuration notes).

# References

- Paper Summary: [/thinking/paper/summary.md](/thinking/paper/summary.md)
- Paper Abstract: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442
- Paper PDF: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.03442
